content/pages/about.md, before:

---
title: 'About'
template: 'page'
---

My main areas of interest are **front-end development** and **technical leadership**.

I am constantly seeking to improve my skills and knowledge, and I am always eager to learn about new technologies. I am not afraid to get my hands dirty and dive into the technical details, always striving to understand how things work. I try to be as open-minded as possible, and I believe that every technology or framework has something valuable to offer.

I began my career with .NET/C# back in 2008/2009, but I have since shifted my focus towards front-end development. While I still enjoy working on the technical side of things, I am now more interested in exploring the role of a Staff+ engineer and how I can contribute to technical leadership for greater impact in the organization.

In 2019 and 2023, I had the pleasure of being involved in organizing the [Revo.js conference](https://revojs.ro/) - a not-for-profit event held in Timișoara, Romania.

#### Sometimes I present at smaller events, and I've been invited to a few podcasts or even hosted workshops:

- Adrian Fâciu @ "Zeamă de Developer" podcast
- Beyond senior @ All-stack hangout
- What it means to be a senior developer @ tim.js meetup
- SPA, SSR, SSG: How Remix gets the best of all worlds @ tim.js meetup
- Sharing code at runtime: module federation @ tim.js meetup
- TypeScript @ internal WeVideo presentation
- Web components with LitElement @ tim.js meetup
- Web components for everyone @ Codecamp Timisoara
- NgRx Tips & Tricks @ Voxxed Days Frontend Bucharest
- NgRx Workshop @ Voxxed Days Frontend Bucharest
- Adrian Fâciu @ My Angular Story podcast
- Taking Angular offline @ tim.js meetup
- NgRx Tips & Tricks @ Adventures in Angular podcast
- Barrel files: to use or not to use @ tim.js meetup
- Angular state management (2 days) @ internal Visma workshop
- Angular Workshop (3 days) @ internal Visma workshop

I have a variety of hobbies like hiking, running, playing board and video games, and taking photos. Every month, I discover a new one!

Commit message:

Adding Sibiu Web meetup and JsHeroes meetup

content/pages/about.md, after:

---
title: 'About'
template: 'page'
---

My main areas of interest are **front-end development** and **technical leadership**.

I am constantly seeking to improve my skills and knowledge, and I am always eager to learn about new technologies. I am not afraid to get my hands dirty and dive into the technical details, always striving to understand how things work. I try to be as open-minded as possible, and I believe that every technology or framework has something valuable to offer.

I began my career with .NET/C# back in 2008/2009, but I have since shifted my focus towards front-end development. While I still enjoy working on the technical side of things, I am now more interested in exploring the role of a Staff+ engineer and how I can contribute to technical leadership for greater impact in the organization.

In 2019 and 2023, I had the pleasure of being involved in organizing the [Revo.js conference](https://revojs.ro/) - a not-for-profit event held in Timișoara, Romania.

#### Sometimes I present at smaller events, and I've been invited to a few podcasts or even hosted workshops:

- How to be a senior developer @ Sibiu Web Meetup
- Technical leadership: who, what & how @ JsHeroes meetup
- Adrian Fâciu @ "Zeamă de Developer" podcast
- Beyond senior @ All-stack hangout
- What it means to be a senior developer - lightning talk @ tim.js meetup
- SPA, SSR, SSG: How Remix gets the best of all worlds @ tim.js meetup
- Sharing code at runtime: module federation @ tim.js meetup
- TypeScript @ internal WeVideo presentation
- Web components with LitElement @ tim.js meetup
- Web components for everyone @ Codecamp Timisoara
- NgRx Tips & Tricks @ Voxxed Days Frontend Bucharest
- NgRx Workshop @ Voxxed Days Frontend Bucharest
- Adrian Fâciu @ My Angular Story podcast
- Taking Angular offline @ tim.js meetup
- NgRx Tips & Tricks @ Adventures in Angular podcast
- Barrel files: to use or not to use @ tim.js meetup
- Angular state management (2 days) @ internal Visma workshop
- Angular Workshop (3 days) @ internal Visma workshop

I have a variety of hobbies like hiking, running, playing board and video games, and taking photos. Every month, I discover a new one!
